

           Module 2:

                                                       CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION

                  Cells, the smallest structures capable of maintaining life and reproducing, compose all living things, from
           single-celled plants to multibillion-celled animals. The human body, which is made up of numerous cells, begins as
           a single, newly fertilized cell.

           LEARNING OBJECTIVES
           - Describe the structure of a cell

                                                              CELL MEMBRANE

                  Every cell in the body is enclosed by a cell (Plasma) membrane. The cell membrane separates the material out-
           side the cell, extracellular, from the material inside the cell, intracellular. It maintains the integrity of a cell
           and controls passage of materials into and out of the cell. All materials within a cell must have access to the cell
           membrane (the cell's boundary) for the needed exchange.

                 The cell membrane is a double layer of phospholipid molecules. Proteins in the cell membrane provide structural
           support, form channels for passage of materials, act as receptor sites, function as carrier molecules, and provide id-
           entification markers.

                                                           NUCLEUS AND NUCLEOLUS

                 The nucleus, formed by a nuclear membrane around a fluid nucleoplasm, is the control center of the cell. Threads
           of chromatin in the nucleus contain deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), the genetic material of the cell. The nucleolus is a
           dense region of ribonucleic acid (RNA) in the nucleus and is the site of ribosome formation. The nucleus determines how
           the cell will function, as well as the basic structure of that cell.

                                                                CYTOPLASM

                 The cytoplasm is the gel-like fluid inside the cell. It is the medium for chemical reaction. It provides a platform
           upon which other organelles can operate within the cell. All of the functions for cell expansion, growth and replication
           are carried out in the cytoplasm of a cell. Within the cytoplasm, materials move by diffusion, a physical process that can
           work only for short distances.

                                                          CYTOPLASMIC ORGANELLES

                 Cytoplasmic organelles are "little organs" that are suspended in the cytoplasm of the cell. Each type of organelle has
           a definite structure and a specific role in the function of the cell. Examples of cytoplasmic organelles are mitochondrion,
           ribosomes, endoplasmic reticulum, golgi apparatus, and lysosomes.