


           Module 5:

                                                          CELL CYCLE

                   The cell cycle can be thought of as the life cycle of a cell. In other words, it is the series of
          growth and development steps a cell undergoes between its 'birth'—formation by the division of a mother cell
          (and reproduction) division to make two new daughter cells.

          LEARNING OBJECTIVES
          - Identify the stages of cell cycle

                                                       STAGES OF CELL CYCLE

                   Different cells take different lengths of time to complete the cell cycle. A typical human cell might
          take about 24 hours to divide, but fast-cycling mammalian cells, like the ones that line the intestine, can com-
          plete a cycle every 9-10 hours when they're grown in culture.

                   To divide, a cell must complete several important tasks: it must grow, copy its genetic material (DNA),
         and physically split into two daughter cells. Cells perform these tasks in an organized, predictable series of
         steps that make up the cell cycle. The cell cycle is a cycle, rather than a linear pathway, because at the end of
         each go-round, the two daughter cells can start the exact same process over again from the beginning.

                   In eukaryotic cells, or cells with a nucleus, the stages of the cell cycle are divided into two major
         phases, interphase and the mitotic (M) phase. During interphase, the cell grows and makes a copy of its DNA. On
         the other hand, during the mitotic (M) phase, the cell separates its DNA into two sets and divides its cytoplasm,
         forming two new cells.

                                                              INTERPHASE

                   Let’s enter the cell cycle just as a cell forms, by division of its mother cell. What must this newborn
        cell do next if it wants to go on and divide itself? Preparation for division happens in three steps: First is the G1
        Phase, wherein the cells grow physically larger, copies organelles and makes the molecular building blocks it will
        beed in later steps. Second is the S Phase wherein the cell synthesizes a complete copy of the DNA in its nucleus. It
        also duplicates a microtubule- organizing structure called the centrosome. Lastly is the G2 Phase wherin the cell grows
        more, makes proteins and organelles and begins to reorganize its contents in preparation for mitosis.

                                                                M PHASE

                  During the mitotic (M) phase, the cell divides its copied DNA and cytoplasm to make two new cells. M phase in-
        volves two distinct division-related processes: mitosis and cytokinesis.

                  In mitosis, the nuclear DNA of the cell condenses into visible chromosomes and is pulled apart by the mitotic
        spindle, a specialized structure made out of microtubules. Mitosis takes place in four stages: prophase (sometimes divi-
        ded into early prophase and prometaphase), metaphase, anaphase, and telophase.

                  In cytokinesis, the cytoplasm of the cell is split in two, making two new cells. Cytokinesis usually begins
        just as mitosis is ending, with a little overlap. Importantly, cytokinesis takes place differently in animal and plant
        cells.


