


           Module 4:

                                                              CELL TYPES

                 Humans are made up of trillions of cells \— the basic unit of life on earth. In this article, we explain some of the
         structures found in cells and describe a few of the many types of cell found in our bodies.

           LEARNING OBJECTIVES
           - Identify different cell types and its functions

                 When you consider the complexity of the human body, it is no surprise that there are hundreds of different types of
          cell. Below is a small selection of human cell types:

                                                               STEM CELLS

                Stem cells are cells that are yet to choose what they are going to become. Some differentiate to become a certain
         cell type, and others divide to produce more stem cells.They are found in both the embryo and some adult tissues, such
         as bone marrow.

                                                               BONE CELLS
  
                There are at least three primary types of bone cell: First are the Osteoclasts, which dissolve bone. Second are the
         Osteoblasts, which forms a new bone. Lastly are the Osteocytes, which are surrounded by bone and help communicate with other
         bone cells.

                                                              BLOOD CELLS

                There are three major types of blood cell: First are the red blood cells, which carry oxygen around the body. Second
         are the white blood cells, which are part of the immune system. Third are the platelets, which help blood clot to prevent
         blood loss after injury.

                                                              MUSCLE CELLS

                Also called myocytes, muscle cells are long, tubular cells. Muscle cells are important for a huge range of functions,
         including movement, support, and internal functions, such as peristalsis \— the movement of food along the gut.

                                                              SPERM CELLS

                These tadpole-shaped cells are the smallest in the human body.They are motile, meaning that they can move. They achieve
         this movement by using their tail (flagellum), which is packed with energy-giving mitochondria. Sperm cells cannot divide; they
         only carry one copy of each chromosome (haploid), unlike the majority of cells, which carry two copies (diploid).

                                                              FEMALE EGG CELL

                Compared with the sperm cell, the female egg cell is a giant\; it is the largest human cell. The egg cell is also haploid
        so that the DNA from the sperm and egg can combine to create a diploid cell.

                                                                FAT CELLS

                Fat cells are also called adipocytes and are the main constituent in adipose tissue. They contain stored fats called tri-
        gly cerides that can be used as energy when needed. Once the triglycerides are used up, the fat cells shrink. Adipocytes also pro-
        ducesome hormones.

                                                               NERVE CELLS

               Nerves cells are the communication system of the body. Also called neurons, they consist of two major parts \— the cell body
        and nerve processes. The central body contains the nucleus and other organelles, and the nerve processes (axons or dendrites) run
        like long fingers, carrying messages far and wide. Some of these axons can be over 1 meter long.