


            Module 3:

                                                   EUKARYOTIC CELLS VS PROKARYOTIC CELLS

                    A eukaryotic cell has a true membrane-bound nucleus and has other membranous organelles that allow
            for compartmentalization of functions.

           LEARNING OBJECTIVES
           - Describe eukaryotic cells and its structure
           - Describe prokaryotic cells and its structure

                                                           PROKARYOTIC CELLS

                    All cells share four common components: First, a plasma membrane: an outer covering that separates the
           cell’s interior from its surrounding environment. Second,cytoplasm: a jelly-like cytosol within the cell in which
           other cellular components are found. Third, DNA: the genetic material of the cell. Lastly, ribosomes is where pro-
           tein synthesis occurs.

                    A prokaryote is a simple, single-celled (unicellular) organism that lacks an organized nucleus or any other
           membrane-bound organelle. We will shortly come to see that this is significantly different in eukaryotes. Prokaryotic
           DNA is found in a central part of the cell: the nucleoid.

                    At 0.1 to 5.0 μm in diameter, prokaryotic cells are significantly smaller than eukaryotic cells, which have
           diameters ranging from 10 to 100 μm. The small size of prokaryotes allows ions and organic molecules that enter them
           to quickly diffuse to other parts of the cell.

                                                              EUKARYOTIC CELLS

                    Like a prokaryotic cell, a eukaryotic cell has a plasma membrane, cytoplasm, and ribosomes. However, unlike
           prokaryotic cells, eukaryotic cells have: First,a membrane-bound nucleus. Second, numerous membrane-bound organelles
           (including the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, chloroplasts, and mitochondria). Third, several rod-shaped chro-
           mosomes.

                    Because a eukaryotic cell’s nucleus is surrounded by a membrane, it is often said to have a 'true nucleus.'
           Organelles (meaning 'little organ') have specialized cellular roles, just as the organs of your body have specialized
           roles. They allow different functions to be compartmentalized in different areas of the cell.

                    While all eukaryotic cells contain the aforementioned organelles and structures, there are some striking dif-
           ferences between animal and plant cells. Animal cells have a centrosome and lysosomes, whereas plant cells do not. The
           centrosome is a microtubule\-organizing center found near the nuclei of animal cells while lysosomes take care of the
           cell’s digestive process.

                    In addition, plant cells have a cell wall, a large central vacuole, chloroplasts, and other specialized plas-
           tids, whereas animal cells do not. The cell wall protects the cell, provides structural support, and gives shape to the
           cell while the central vacuole plays a key role in regulating the cell’s concentration of water in changing environmen-
           tal conditions. Chloroplasts are the organelles that carry out photosynthesis.